piano chord forcefully kickstarts the song, followed by quick scales, low to high, high to low. Gloria Gaynor’s voice starts timidly: “First I was afraid/I was petrified.” As she grows certain in her story of survival and strength, her voice starts to boom, claiming space. The guitar riff starts as Gaynor is forced to confront her terrible ex — “And so you’re back/From outer space” — as if it’s giving her momentum to send him away and live a better life without him.
In late 1978, Gloria Gaynor released “I Will Survive” as a B-side disco track, not knowing the song would soon become the definitive single of her career. The track was a hit in the disco scene and quickly became an anthem of survival in the LGBTQ community that would endure until at least the mid-1990s.
The song, a B-side to a song called “Substitute,” was written and produced by Freddie Perren and Dino Fekaris, who wrote “I Will Survive” as an inspiration to overcome their own obstacles. By his account, Fekaris wrote the lyrics after he was fired from Motown Records as an inspiration for himself and his ability to survive and become a full-time songwriter.
Gaynor was facing her own challenges at the time: After being dropped by record label Polydor, she fell off the stage during a performance and was left paralyzed from the waist down. She went through spinal surgery and a three-month hospital stay. She was still wearing a back brace when she recorded “I Will Survive” after being picked up again by Polydor.
The moment Gaynor was living in when she recorded “I Will Survive” no doubt contributed to the song’s energetic message of survival.
“[Fekaris and Perren] said, ‘We think you’re the one that we’ve been waiting for to record this song that we wrote a couple of years ago,’” Gaynor explained in a 2013 interview with Audible. “When I read the lyrics, I realized the reason they’d been waiting for me to record that song was that God had given that song to them for them to set aside, waiting for him to get everything in order for me to meet up with them. And that song was ‘I Will Survive.’”
The moment Gaynor was living in when she recorded “I Will Survive” — rejection from the music industry as a talented Black woman, the inability to rely on her body for the first time — no doubt contributed to the song’s energetic message of survival. Soon, this message became important to people in the LGBTQ community, expanding the message of endurance to more people in the margins of society.
Perhaps nowadays this seems strange: Gaynor has always been openly religious, and when asked explicitly about her LGBTQ fan base in a 2007 BBC interview, she said, “I want to lead them to Christ and what he has for them.” But the origins of disco, the genre in which Gaynor thrived, and the public’s racism, queerphobia against the genre, along with the AIDS crisis in the late 1970s and the whole of the 1980s, tell a more complete story as to why “I Will Survive” remains an LGBTQ anthem to this day.
BBefore the mainstreaming of disco music, the genre emerged as an urban counterculture that protested the dominance of rock music and heteronormativity. The first disco gatherings were small private parties organized by New York City DJ David Mancuso in 1970, whose soirees were a safe space for gay men to dance together without being arrested. The genre itself puts less emphasis on guitar riffs at a time when rock and roll was at its height, allowing for a mixture of queer African American, Latinx, and Italian American music that stood as a counterpoint to Woodstock hippie culture. These queer parties and sounds widely rejected the nonnormative, opening up space for queerness and racial mixing through music and dancing.
“Historical accounts locate disco’s origins in Manhattan clubs whose clientele were African American and Latino, and gay — meaning: gay men,” writes musicologist Nadine Hubbs in her article “‘I Will Survive’: Musical Mappings of Queer Social Space in a Disco Anthem.” However, Hubbs clarifies that the scene quickly extended beyond cis gay men of color to include queer women and genderqueer people: “Gay men and lesbians, drag queens and ‘fag hags’ were all part of the 1970s–1980s disco scene in countless queer locales, whether or not at disco’s New York.”
“This song has a powerful message: that each of us holds our destiny in our own hands, and that we control how we will be after something traumatic happens to us.”
Disco music was a place of resistance for those considered too gay, too Black, or too Latino to join the mainstream hippie rock and roll scene. Tim Lawrence, professor of cultural studies at the University of East London, argues that the disco scene attempted to create a “democratic, cross-cultural community that was open-ended in its formation,” where people who frequented the scene were aware of its queer thrust or were queer themselves. According to Lawrence, the dancing of the disco scene did not reaffirm heterosexuality, cis-normativity, or even categories of race; it destabilized those constructions through an open and diverse dance floor with endless possibilities.
Niv, 59, a gay man who first heard “I Will Survive” in a West Hollywood nightclub, explains that the song expresses a kind of control over the queer community’s own destiny. “This song has a powerful message: that each of us holds our destiny in our own hands, and that we control how we will be after something traumatic happens to us,” he says. “The message constantly reminds us that we will make it through. And when we hear it again, for the millionth time we recall how we did make it through the last time or the time before that, and that we have the infinite capacity to do so again and again.”
The possibilities of a queer-accepting society before the AIDS crisis, which would hit the LGBTQ community in 1980, were palpable. In the face of families who didn’t accept queerness, “I Will Survive” felt like a revolution of the self in a growing scene of acceptance. Gaynor recording the song in a back brace, the lyrics inspired by being down and out and still surviving through it all, and the growing imposition of Gaynor’s voice as she bellows that she will survive, no matter what — these were ripe aspects to be read as queer across the United States and the world.
From 1981 onward, the queer club scene during the AIDS crisis would become a facet of survival for the queer community, where people met their friends and made sure they were still alive. “Often, I was relieved to see people at the Saint at large parties,” writes Steve Weinstein on why clubbing was so important for gay men during the crisis. “I had assumed they had died in the interim.”
But even before the crisis, the LGBTQ community was struggling with prejudice, police repression, and fatal hatred. In those safe spaces the disco scene provided, as Gaynor’s singing becomes more dramatic and her transformation is complete, the listener can briefly believe this is true for themselves, even if society’s violence and neglect might take that away tomorrow.
TThe possibilities of liberation through the disco scene were eroded, Lawrence writes, once disco went mainstream in films like Saturday Night Fever in 1978, which whitewashed and straightened the genre to sell it more widely. Disco was being commercialized, displaced from its place of radical counterculture; it soon became an economic threat to rock and roll, and its racial and queer origins only stoked the fire.
After “I Will Survive” gained platinum single status in May 1979, an anti-disco riot broke out in South Chicago in July at the behest of radio personality Steve Dahl. Rock, metal, and new wave fans became angry at how disco was being mainstreamed, taking space in radio broadcasts that, they felt, the genre didn’t deserve.
Dahl, an already controversial radio personality at the time, invited his listeners to bring records they would like to see burned to Comiskey Park after the first White Sox game on July 12, 1979. Dahl’s listeners had become steadily fed up with disco’s domination of air time; his incitement attracted 50,000 people who had no interest in watching the White Sox play the Detroit Tigers. They wanted to see Dahl explode the disco records they hated to the chants of “Disco sucks!” After Dahl gave a speech and blew up a box of records, “Fans charged out from the stands, wrecking the field and causing the cancellation of the second game (the first time a game was canceled due to a factor other than weather),” writes Tony Sclafani for MSN Today. “Eventually, police were called in.”
Despite Dahl later claiming that his anti-disco campaign was for monetary gain as his rock-playing radio station became increasingly irrelevant, his critics claimed there were racist undertones to his rhetoric. Craig Werner, author of A Change Is Gonna Come: Music, Race, and the Soul of America, describes the anti-disco movement as “an unholy alliance of funkateers and feminists, progressives and puritans, rockers and reactionaries. Nonetheless, the attacks on disco gave respectable voice to the ugliest kinds of unacknowledged racism, sexism, and homophobia.”
Though Disco Demolition Night and the subsequent death of disco were about the wider origins of the genre, Gaynor’s “I Will Survive” still stands as an anthem of liberation that inadvertently defied the culture wars of the time.
Similar to current culture wars where diversity and intersectionality are scapegoated as cosmopolitan and outside the working-class imaginary, disco was similarly decontextualized from its working-class, queer, Black, and Brown roots. After Disco Demolition Night, the word “disco” became controversial, with record labels rebranding to “dance music” instead.
“Disco never got credit for being the first and only music ever to transcend all nationalities, race, creed, color, and age groups,” Gaynor told Sclafani when asked about the decline of disco after the riot. “It was common ground for everyone.”
TThough Disco Demolition Night and the subsequent death of disco were about the wider origins of the genre, Gaynor’s “I Will Survive” still stands as an anthem of liberation that inadvertently defied the culture wars of the time. Beyond the queer readings of the anthem and its relevance to the AIDS crisis, Gaynor has admitted in recent years that in addition to the back brace she wore, she had to overcome an even bigger battle as a Black woman. Gaynor is a survivor of multiple instances of child sexual assault, something she revealed in her memoir titled after her defining single.
“I felt that as an entertainer, I should disclose this part of my life to help people who’ve gone through it recognize that it’s not your fault,” Gaynor said in a 2017 interview on Oprah: Where Are They Now?
Gaynor’s experience brings the draw of “I Will Survive” firmly into the reality of Black womanhood and the need to survive in the intersection of being Black and a woman in America. According to the African American Policy Forum, 60% of Black girls will experience sexual violence by the time they turn 18, so Gaynor’s experience is not uncommon. People who suffered gendered violence have called themselves “survivors” rather than “victims” since the 1970s, so it is unsurprising that “I Will Survive” came across as a feminist anthem even before Gaynor’s revelation about her own survivorship.
“Putting together the lyrics with knowing that the singer is a Black woman, it becomes relatable to me,” says Isabela da Silva Pery, 23, who is Afro-Latina. “Especially in relation to relationships, because of the Black woman’s loneliness, but also more generally with regards to racism. It’s a point of surviving despite the prejudice, because you are alive and you feel love. Especially in the current moment we are living.”
“I Will Survive” tells the story of a transformation of the self, a realization that your abuser — be it society in general or a specific person — has lied to you and that you are worthy of survival and love. This transformation is what survivors of gendered and sexual violence go through when they are processing and healing. While writing this essay, several women of different races told me the song gave them strength to leave an abusive partner.
“I remember listening to ‘I Will Survive’ and hearing the line ‘I’m not that chained-up little girl who’s still in love with you,’ and it really resonated with me,” a survivor of domestic abuse who prefers not to identify herself told me. “It was at that point that I felt the wool had been pulled from my eyes, and I stopped seeing [my abuser] as this troubled person whose attention I craved, but a very toxic person who I no longer wanted anything to do with.”
Musicologist Nadine Hubbs describes “I Will Survive” as a song that contains a diverse exchange of musical and verbal discourses of difference that inspires marginalized people across several intersections to feel seen and understood. In a world of pain and hopelessness, there is something liberating about someone asserting they have what it takes to keep going despite a world that hates you because of who you are. The mainstreaming of disco, Hubbs argues, allowed this radical message to “pass” in mainstream culture, but it also provoked a backlash when its disruption of the status quo was found out.
Thriving in this world can be difficult if you live in the margins. Sexuality, race, gender, and social class are categories that define our experiences, the pitfalls we are likely to fall into, and whether or not we survive. “I Will Survive” isn’t just an anthem for survival; it also expresses hope about what comes after survival. As Gaynor has spent most of her career affirming, survival is the first step to freedom, independence, and happiness — and who doesn’t want to believe these are possible?
A ‘scene’ is distinct from a city’s musical history, which has a longer term arc of course. Nor is it the idea of conjuring a city through music, Metropolis Shanghai and Chavez Ravine for example.
Instead, ‘the scene’ is usually a relatively short-lived concentration of artistic activity, which nonetheless kick-starts or exemplifies some wider creative, and usually economic, activity. Over the years it becomes subject to furious debate and wild claims but there’s something there and something powerful, no matter how intangible.
Richard Florida, and others many others before him, noted the importance of music scenes in cities, despite his focus being too limited by genre and US-focused at that. Florida calls it the ‘audio identity’ of the city, which doesn’t feel quite right given the transient nature of most scenes. Audio identities, perhaps, as cities can lead multiple lives here. (‘Madchester’ is long gone, for instance, though it was a sort of identity at the time, or just after the time. It can co-exist with the city getting a new centre for classical music around the same time, all arguably stemming from cultural patterns discernible from the mid-19thC onwards.)
But Florida gets the gist nonetheless. In an article back in January 2008 (in the Globe and Mail, and on the back of him observing the healthy music scenes in Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver) Florida discerns the overwhelmingly metropolitan nature of music, seeing them as classic examples of what Michael Porter would call ‘local clusters in a global economy’.
“Music scenes provide a useful lens through which to better understand why innovation and economic activity continue to cluster in today’s global economy. Their clustering is puzzling because music-making requires little, if anything, in the way of physical input (such as iron ore or coal) to succeed, and they don’t generate economies of scale. Because musical and artistic endeavours require little more than small groups to make their final products, you would think that musicians should be able to live anywhere they want. Music scenes have every reason to “fly apart” and spread our geographically, especially in this age of the Internet and social media. But they don’t. Instead, they concentrate and cluster in specific cities and regions.”
To me, having grown up in scene-rich Sheffield and Manchester, this is a little obvious. But as well as growing up in those cities, I also did my MA in Manchester, studying creative industries and the city, where my colleagues Adam Brown and Justin O’Connor were more actively researching the music industry and the city specifically, from the early 1990s onwards.

In those ABC Radio National documentaries Brisbane and Melbourne have distinct ‘audio identities’ on display — identities which appear to have little in common with the large, successful cities we see today, but in fact were important formative influences on both. There are numerous other examples of transformative scenes from the last few hundred years.

And you could add in Kothen 1717–1728, London 1962–66, Düsseldorf in the early 1970s, Brisbane in the late-1970s as above, Liverpool again, in the late-1970s, and probably hundreds more. Canterbury is perhaps the odd-man-out there; the rest are all splendidly urban.
But not only do music scenes, and their study, form vital examples of how creative industries make the city and vice versa, the finding that music scenes are distinctly urban also tells us a wider truth about creativity, technology and cities.
All this ‘soft infrastructure’ — such as cultural industry — is overwhelmingly metropolitan in nature: 70% of the UK’s creative employment is metropolitan. This is only reinforced by information and communications technologies (ICT). Contemporary cities are characterised by networks; creative industries are predicated on the most hyper-networked of organisational forms; ICT is enabled by, and in turn enables, networks above all else. So ICT and cities tend to be a good match.
(In fact you could argue, even though I’d certainly class ICT as soft infrastructure, that the very real capital costs and physical outlay of facilitating ICT are even more of a reason for focusing it ever more in cities. Far more so than music.)
Yet there’s still this decentralisation myth about ICT and cities. And it’s alive and well, believe me. There exists a surprisingly robust school of thought that ‘telecommuting’ — and how quaint and Toffler-esque that sounds — will enable human activity to relocate and work in ex-urban or rural locations in usefully significant numbers. Odd, I know, but it’s a constant theme still echoing round the intersection of urban planning, regional policy, and the various ICT industries. It’s around in Australia, with its complex, too-successful cities and superficially limitless spaces in-between, but it’s also abroad in the USA and Britain. It’s perhaps associated with so-called digital immigrants, but it might also exemplify an inability to deal with cities intellectually and emotionally (a desire to look for an answer elsewhere, as intrinsically unsustainable as that may be).
It’s also a misunderstanding about some contemporary working practices — and innovation and creativity — which is better characterised instead by ideas such as ‘nomadism’, as The Economist has it, or other ways of working increasingly influenced by the structures and approaches of the creative industries. (I’m not suggesting everyone enjoys the ability to be nomads in The Economist mould. Many don’t have that luxury, of course. But the knowledge workers envisaged to be telecommuters would certainly fall into this category.)
Those expecting ICT to enable a decentralisation of urban activities fail to recognise this apparently essential truth about cities and technology — that they only reinforce each other, and that both are enablers for something else. Even though I’d be the first to suggest we need to see ‘information as a material’ and that it can be be useful to consider it a medium in its own right, for most of the time it is simply a quiet platform for other things. This analogy with music might be useful to make the point even clearer.
As Florida points out, there’s essentially no physical logistical reason that music scenes are centred on cities. Yet they overwhelmingly are, for the reasons he describes in his article. People go to the city to test their ideas, perform, learn, sell, discuss, share. And they do this physically and digitally, in and around the city. Suggesting that ICT might enable decentralisation instead is focusing on technology at the expense of understanding what people do with it.
It’s somewhat like suggesting that the Fender Stratocaster’s potential availability in a village would mean that music scenes will relocate there. The evidence suggests the opposite, of course. ICT enables distinctly urban activities, and does little, save for a relatively small handful of edge cases, for anything else. It is a means to an end, and that end is generally urban in context. I’d guess the increasingly pervasive nature of ICT — this physical computing — is only likely to reinforce this urbanity.
In his Flight of the Creative Class, Florida also rejects Thomas ‘The World Is Flat’ Friedman’s assertion that technology has levelled the playing field. Whereas Friedman states that “you can innovate without having to emigrate”, Florida instead finds that the world is not flat but “spiky”, consolidating in cities.
“The tallest peaks — the cities and regions that drive the world’s economy — are growing even higher, while the valleys mostly languish.”
Hip-hop magazines don’t hold a reputation for New Yorker-level of writing and journalistic integrity. But these publications managed to capture, contextualize and critique the subculture and genre of music that is now the most popular in the world.
Vikki Tobak was a hip-hop journalist in the early 90s when hip-hop wasn’t as big as it is today. “A lot of mainstream magazines — Rolling Stone, SPIN, Essence, Jet — weren’t really covering hip-hop, it was still very underground,” Tobak recalls during a Q&A session at Unknown Union, an independent street fashion boutique located in Maboneng, Johannesburg. The author and veteran journalist is speaking about her coffee-table book, Contact High: A Visual History of Hip-Hop (2018), for the first time in South Africa. “It wasn’t really seen as reputable music,” Tobak continues. “So, all these independent magazines started coming up, and I started writing for them. I was already around in the mix, I didn’t even have a writing background, the writing wasn’t that great. A lot of the photographers that were shooting came from the community the artists came from.”
Approximately three decades since those times, Tobak felt the need to create a visual history of the genre. For Contact High: A Visual History of Hip-Hop, she curated images of different artists from different photographers — being an industry veteran, she had a huge database of photographers at her disposal. “I wanted to get the photographers to digitize all those contact sheets and start putting them on Instagram and really just making sure that none of the photos got lost,” says Tobak. The project started as an Instagram page before it became a book and an exhibition currently showing in Los Angeles.

Hip-hop is an alternate universe populated by superheroes and villains. It’s hard to distinguish between fact and fiction in the stories told by rappers in their lyrics. This leads to rappers portraying a certain image to the public, one which may not be representative of the human being behind this deity that commands respect from their fans.
Rappers are flawed just like all human beings. In a world that’s growing less tolerant of problematic and discriminatory behavior — homophobia, misogyny, ableism etc. — hip-hop artists have found themselves on the wrong side of the law and social justice commentators and activists. This is owed to the tendency of hip-hop lyrics and artists being all kinds of problematic.[1]
A question from the audience to Tobak is what her thought process was in including rappers such as The Notorious B.I.G and XXXTentacion on Contact High. Both rappers have highly publicized gender-based violence histories.
Tobak says the process was a seriously tricky one. She’s aware of all of hip-hop’s problematic traits. She recalls an incident that occurred at the exhibition. “The woman who runs the museum where Contact High is showing knows nothing about hip-hop,” Tobak says, “she came to me in a panic one day, she was like, ‘Do you know that XXXTentacion did this and that?’ and ‘Do you know that most of the people on this show have drug dealing and other kinds of background crime issues?’” The last part of the story inspires chuckles in the audience.
“Of course, as a woman,” Tobak says, “the gender-based violence issue is huge for me,” Tobak says. “So, we struggled. There’s a big culture right now, cancel culture, it’s so complex. Because when you put someone’s photo on a wall, it becomes iconography, versus maybe presenting it as a document.”
She sighs and, afterward, reiterates that the situation is complicated. “But photos are not meant to celebrate actions necessarily,” she says. “[They are] meant to continue the music that really rose up from everyday people culture to global phenomenon. But are there really ugly stories in between? Yeah. A lot of our leaders have a lot of stories that are now coming out too, and I don’t want to say this is worse, this is better. But it’s complicated. I can’t even pretend it was a clean decision from me.”
Telling a different narrative
Tobak, in her curation process, says that she was deliberate in ensuring that she was telling a “different” narrative, which doesn’t portray black men and women in the same negative light as mainstream media has for years, was being told through her curation process. Asked by an audience member why she only included the photos that show rappers as icons, instead of, say, their mug shots — to, you know, tell the full story. Tobak says: “It’s because that’s not their defining moment. [Photographer] Barron Claiborne said it very well: ‘The images I was seeing in the media of black men were not the fathers, uncles and sons that I knew. And I myself as a young black man wanted to portray my fellow black men as royal, king-like, and with all the mistakes and the human things that happen.’”

She adds that she didn’t want to archive artists’ worst moments. “I don’t necessarily want to portray them at their best either,” she says, “I just want to portray an authentic person and all their layers, that’s what a good photograph does.”
An image captures one moment and preserves it forever. But images all have stories behind them, and these stories which aren’t always told. For Contact High, Tobak accompanies each image with an interview with the photographer in which they share the image’s full story.
To expand the stories, each photographer was required to submit their contact sheet to help expand on the stories — a grid of shots that were developed from the film for the clients to pick from. These contact sheets include the shots that were never chosen for the magazine and album covers.
“So, the contact sheets show the in-between photos,” Tobak says. For instance, an alternative shot of the iconic photo of Biggie wearing a crown and smoldering intimidatingly shows the late Brooklyn rapper smiling — a state in which he was hardly ever seen by the world.
“That’s a photo that people who knew Biggie would look at and be like, ‘that’s the Biggie we knew. Not the stern face guy that was on the cover of Rap Pages magazine’. So that’s why the contact sheets are really important because they show the rest of the story. And they humanize these young artists who really are young kids.”
This shows us the Clark Kent side of our favorite superheroes. The photographer Brian Cross recalls the late rapper Ol’ Dirty Bastard being shy when he was instructed to put his hands on a model’s breasts. This was during the time Cross made an image of him using Janet Jackson’s Rolling Stone September 1993 cover as an obvious reference.
Danny Clinch’s photograph of 2pac shirtless showing off the tattoos on his torso happened by accident. The photographer shares in a short documentary that is part of the exhibition that he saw the rapper’s tattoos while he was changing shirts on set. “I told him, ‘We could take some topless ones, too, if you are open to that,’” says Clinch.
That image would go on to be one of the most famous photos of 2pac. A painting of the same shot would become the cover of one of 2pac’s posthumous albums, Until The End of Time released in 2001.
The Karl Kani underwear 2pac is wearing in the photo tells a story, says Tobak. She shares that rappers used to wear black-owned brands as a response to established high fashion brands refusing to associate with hip-hop. “Nowadays, street style is universal,” says Tobak., “But back then, a lot of the brands weren’t really wanting hip-hop to represent them — Polo, Tommy Hilfiger were like, ‘please do not wear our clothing, we don’t wanna be associated with that.’[2] So a lot of the brands you see in these photos — Fubu, Karl Kani etc. — they were all independent black-owned brands that came from the community. Tupac did that for free, he didn’t take money from black designers to wear their clothes.”
Unlike most hip-hop projects, Contact High made an effort to be inclusive. Women, who even though have contributed immensely to hip-hop, often get sidelined, on both sides of the microphone get to shine.
“People ask how do I select which photos of women to include in the book,” says Tobak, “There’s not one right way to be a woman. Growing up in the music business, there were very strong women behind the scenes, too — there were women running labels, there were women writers and photographers, so I didn’t have to try that hard to get an equal pairing between men and women photographers, we’ve always been there.”
Knowing all the dynamics in place, Tobak says she ensured a diverse selection of images to send the message that there’s space in hip-hop for different kinds of women rappers. “We have Nicki Minaj and Queen Latifah in the book,” she says. “For me, as long as the woman is in control of the image that’s being put out, apart from what somebody else wants her to look like, then that’s going to be my criteria.”
Contact High gives fans a glimpse into how iconic album and magazine covers were made. It affords rappers their complexity, which they are usually denied by the media and they themselves deny the world.
Follow Contact High on Instagram and their website.

a teenager, Nya Crea would rush home from school and rehearse karaoke tracks every night. She found endless inspiration in Christina Aguilera, Aretha Franklin, Pink and “diva singers with powerful voices and charismatic personalities,” she says from her London home. After 12 years as a professional singer-songwriter, Crea now shares new material and Whitney Houston covers with her 35,000-odd YouTube subscribers.
“I’m always looking for instrumentals to add my voice to,” she says, but until a few months ago struggled to find backing tracks she’d actually want her name attached to. One day, while Crea was frustratedly scrolling through YouTube, she came across a channel called Sing King Karaoke, and hasn’t looked back since. “With Sing King I am never disappointed, and [viewers] love it too which makes me super happy.”
Crea is one of 6.8 million subscribers devoted to Sing King, who since late-2012 have made the joy of screaming pop lyrics at high volumes their business. From their small office, nestled amongst the vibrant streets of Soho in London’s West End, Sing King’s team of six have amassed over 3.3 billion views solely through singalong videos, making them the biggest dedicated karaoke community on YouTube.

Up to 100 million viewers perform bedroom renditions of ‘Bad and Boujee’ by Migos or Frozen 2 ballads every month, with December being their most lucrative to date. 20+ million unique users spent their festive break serenading family members with golden oldies (‘Stayin’ Alive’), Christmas hymns (‘Silent Night’) and new material from impeccably dressed British heartthrobs (Harry Styles).
Those kind of numbers are usually a surefire sign of success — and a resultantly buoyant bank balance. Better yet, the process seems, on the surface, relatively simple: they create an instrumental version of a popular record, add lyrics, upload to YouTube and wait for the revenue to roll in. But that isn’t the case. Until March 2019, when they became a fully licensed channel, a minefield of legal and copyright laws meant Sing King spent years struggling to make their huge platform pay. Now, they’re earning six-figure sums per month.
Sing King was created by Chris Michael, who built his karaoke fortune from the ashes of a quintessentially 2000s-era business. IntoMobiles, Michael’s first company, produced ringtones for Nokia 3310s and flip phones from the hits of Blu Cantrell and other noughties favourites. “I was marketing my service against the Crazy Frog which was everywhere at the time,” laughs Michael. (With just shy of two billion views, the official music video for Crazy Frog’s biggest hit is YouTube’s 41st most-viewed video ever.)

Cell phone ringtones was big business until the global financial recession, regulations and iPhones killed the market, leaving Michael with re-recorded versions of thousands of records. “We had all this content doing nothing,” remembers Michael. “So we repackaged the audio into video and became a karaoke business.”
Karaoke has largely remained the same since 1971 when Japanese musician Daisuke Inoue founded a new form of entertainment, one that encourages often tone-deaf (and always tipsy) revellers to perform wobbly versions of ‘My Heart Will Go On’ to varying degrees of success.
Innovations have happened. In the mid-2000s, home karaoke games like the SingStar series grew popular and by 2009 had sold 20 million copies, but this success didn’t last — Sony recently announced that the SingStar servers will be taken offline on 31st January.
In 2009, UK publications proclaimed the death of karaoke, with The Independent putting part of the blame at a 5% drop in British pubs offering karaoke nights and, strangely, a lack of British singers participating in that year’s World Karaoke Championships. Even in Japan, the home of karaoke, participation numbers have fallen by 15.1% between 1996–2016.
No need to warm up the vocal cords for a rendition of Frank Sinatra’s ‘My Way’, however (one of the most popular songs at funerals). There is good news. Since 2014, annualized revenue in America’s karaoke industry has (slowly) increased by 0.8%, generating $781 million in 2019. IBISWorld stated that “renewed interest in high-end karaoke bars has stimulated consumer interest in urban areas.”
“One reason for the karaoke resurgence is that people are playing with the medium,” says Anna Kealey, host of the Karaoke Theory podcast. “And apps like Smule and Musical.ly, now TikTok, have given people a chance to have fun singing at home.”
“Karaoke is incredibly similar to the experience of going to a club,” adds Sing King CEO Jordan Gross, who is well experienced in both. Before joining Sing King in 2018, Gross co-founded East London venue Oval Space, a haunt for techno DJs and dancers wanting to rave until 6am. “It’s all about enjoying the collective experience of music and sharing that with others.”
Sing King is most popular in the USA, Britain, Indonesia, the Philippines and Brazil, and their audience is predominantly “kids from 13 onwards,” says Sing King COO Shrina Lakhani. “We also have a sweet spot with people between 18–34.” She owes this broader success to how karaoke is moved away from “dark bars” to become a legitimate form of culture. “People want to sing from their bedrooms, with their friends and in the car. YouTube allows them to do this.”
Tracks join the Sing King playlist when they gain success in the pop charts. “Billie Eilish has an incredibly active community, and there’s huge appetite for K-Pop,” tells Lakhani. Sing King also monitor social media trends — their ‘meme karaoke’ playlist features the unforgettable CaptainSparklez ‘Revenge’, and the inimitable ‘ok boomer’ by peter kuli & jedwill. “We have a keen eye on what’s really trending, and it’s not necessarily what’s number one on Spotify,” says Lakhani. But ultimately, their requests are decided by their fans, who plead for future uploads of their favourite songs over hundreds of comments.
“Singing liberates me from stress, and Sing King plays a major role in this,” says Wilson Kitandu from Tanzania. Kitandu is a Sing King superfan, commenting ‘Please I request Juice wrld ft seezyn HIDE instrumental’ on every single one of their Instagram posts dating back to 26th March 2019. “I would love if they upload [this song]. If it’s a wish, I wish to see that song uploaded,” she says. For now, she remains disappointed.
For each video, Sing King commissions a member of their global team of freelance bedroom producers and studio musicians to recreate a chosen record. Hip-hop beatmakers reproduce Kanye West while pop musicians take on Taylor Swift, and it takes around two weeks to get from track request to YouTube. These instrumentals can be freely uploaded, but the bigger problem comes when you attach lyrics to the screen, which require sync licenses to publish.
Broadly speaking, copyrighted songs can be used on YouTube but videos are either not eligible for monetisation or the copyright owner receives the revenue. For Sing King, as aspects of an original song — the artist’s voice — are removed from their videos, the question of who owns and earns what “makes karaoke a complex type of music to license,” says Michael. For this reason, YouTube doesn’t verify karaoke content.
How did Sing King become the exception? Money, mostly. In mid-2018, the team set out to prove to publishers that Sing King could earn them enough regular cash to make it worth their while. “When we started, we were told we’d never be big enough to pay publishers enough revenue,” Michael remembers. “So we took it upon ourselves to show them that we could be big enough.”
Eventually they were successful, and have agreed licensing deals with big players like Sony/ATV, Kobalt and Universal Music Group. After that, following years of failed attempts and pressured negotiation, Sing King proved to YouTube that they had the legal green light. “It wasn’t until March 2019 when we first started to generate ‘proper’ money,” says Gross. Now, as Sing King are the only directly licensed music channel on YouTube, they’re making lots of it, and solely through YouTube adverts.
In 2020, Sing King doesn’t just want to dominate YouTube. It wants to dominate the world. They plan to launch aa mobile and TV app — so you can perform karaoke wherever you want — and with licenses in place, Sing King can pursue brand partnerships, merchandise opportunities and everything else that comes with a hugely popular YouTube channel. But while the future is bright for Sing King, their passion for amateur theatrics remains. “People send us videos from their wedding receptions using Sing King or singing to our playlists on a train in Thailand,” says Michael. “Everybody loves to sing, and we’re giving them the tools to do what they love to do.”
