Hip-hop magazines don’t hold a reputation for New Yorker-level of writing and journalistic integrity. But these publications managed to capture, contextualize and critique the subculture and genre of music that is now the most popular in the world.
Vikki Tobak was a hip-hop journalist in the early 90s when hip-hop wasn’t as big as it is today. “A lot of mainstream magazines — Rolling Stone, SPIN, Essence, Jet — weren’t really covering hip-hop, it was still very underground,” Tobak recalls during a Q&A session at Unknown Union, an independent street fashion boutique located in Maboneng, Johannesburg. The author and veteran journalist is speaking about her coffee-table book, Contact High: A Visual History of Hip-Hop (2018), for the first time in South Africa. “It wasn’t really seen as reputable music,” Tobak continues. “So, all these independent magazines started coming up, and I started writing for them. I was already around in the mix, I didn’t even have a writing background, the writing wasn’t that great. A lot of the photographers that were shooting came from the community the artists came from.”
Approximately three decades since those times, Tobak felt the need to create a visual history of the genre. For Contact High: A Visual History of Hip-Hop, she curated images of different artists from different photographers — being an industry veteran, she had a huge database of photographers at her disposal. “I wanted to get the photographers to digitize all those contact sheets and start putting them on Instagram and really just making sure that none of the photos got lost,” says Tobak. The project started as an Instagram page before it became a book and an exhibition currently showing in Los Angeles.

Hip-hop is an alternate universe populated by superheroes and villains. It’s hard to distinguish between fact and fiction in the stories told by rappers in their lyrics. This leads to rappers portraying a certain image to the public, one which may not be representative of the human being behind this deity that commands respect from their fans.
Rappers are flawed just like all human beings. In a world that’s growing less tolerant of problematic and discriminatory behavior — homophobia, misogyny, ableism etc. — hip-hop artists have found themselves on the wrong side of the law and social justice commentators and activists. This is owed to the tendency of hip-hop lyrics and artists being all kinds of problematic.[1]
A question from the audience to Tobak is what her thought process was in including rappers such as The Notorious B.I.G and XXXTentacion on Contact High. Both rappers have highly publicized gender-based violence histories.
Tobak says the process was a seriously tricky one. She’s aware of all of hip-hop’s problematic traits. She recalls an incident that occurred at the exhibition. “The woman who runs the museum where Contact High is showing knows nothing about hip-hop,” Tobak says, “she came to me in a panic one day, she was like, ‘Do you know that XXXTentacion did this and that?’ and ‘Do you know that most of the people on this show have drug dealing and other kinds of background crime issues?’” The last part of the story inspires chuckles in the audience.
“Of course, as a woman,” Tobak says, “the gender-based violence issue is huge for me,” Tobak says. “So, we struggled. There’s a big culture right now, cancel culture, it’s so complex. Because when you put someone’s photo on a wall, it becomes iconography, versus maybe presenting it as a document.”
She sighs and, afterward, reiterates that the situation is complicated. “But photos are not meant to celebrate actions necessarily,” she says. “[They are] meant to continue the music that really rose up from everyday people culture to global phenomenon. But are there really ugly stories in between? Yeah. A lot of our leaders have a lot of stories that are now coming out too, and I don’t want to say this is worse, this is better. But it’s complicated. I can’t even pretend it was a clean decision from me.”
Telling a different narrative
Tobak, in her curation process, says that she was deliberate in ensuring that she was telling a “different” narrative, which doesn’t portray black men and women in the same negative light as mainstream media has for years, was being told through her curation process. Asked by an audience member why she only included the photos that show rappers as icons, instead of, say, their mug shots — to, you know, tell the full story. Tobak says: “It’s because that’s not their defining moment. [Photographer] Barron Claiborne said it very well: ‘The images I was seeing in the media of black men were not the fathers, uncles and sons that I knew. And I myself as a young black man wanted to portray my fellow black men as royal, king-like, and with all the mistakes and the human things that happen.’”

She adds that she didn’t want to archive artists’ worst moments. “I don’t necessarily want to portray them at their best either,” she says, “I just want to portray an authentic person and all their layers, that’s what a good photograph does.”
An image captures one moment and preserves it forever. But images all have stories behind them, and these stories which aren’t always told. For Contact High, Tobak accompanies each image with an interview with the photographer in which they share the image’s full story.
To expand the stories, each photographer was required to submit their contact sheet to help expand on the stories — a grid of shots that were developed from the film for the clients to pick from. These contact sheets include the shots that were never chosen for the magazine and album covers.
“So, the contact sheets show the in-between photos,” Tobak says. For instance, an alternative shot of the iconic photo of Biggie wearing a crown and smoldering intimidatingly shows the late Brooklyn rapper smiling — a state in which he was hardly ever seen by the world.
“That’s a photo that people who knew Biggie would look at and be like, ‘that’s the Biggie we knew. Not the stern face guy that was on the cover of Rap Pages magazine’. So that’s why the contact sheets are really important because they show the rest of the story. And they humanize these young artists who really are young kids.”
This shows us the Clark Kent side of our favorite superheroes. The photographer Brian Cross recalls the late rapper Ol’ Dirty Bastard being shy when he was instructed to put his hands on a model’s breasts. This was during the time Cross made an image of him using Janet Jackson’s Rolling Stone September 1993 cover as an obvious reference.
Danny Clinch’s photograph of 2pac shirtless showing off the tattoos on his torso happened by accident. The photographer shares in a short documentary that is part of the exhibition that he saw the rapper’s tattoos while he was changing shirts on set. “I told him, ‘We could take some topless ones, too, if you are open to that,’” says Clinch.
That image would go on to be one of the most famous photos of 2pac. A painting of the same shot would become the cover of one of 2pac’s posthumous albums, Until The End of Time released in 2001.
The Karl Kani underwear 2pac is wearing in the photo tells a story, says Tobak. She shares that rappers used to wear black-owned brands as a response to established high fashion brands refusing to associate with hip-hop. “Nowadays, street style is universal,” says Tobak., “But back then, a lot of the brands weren’t really wanting hip-hop to represent them — Polo, Tommy Hilfiger were like, ‘please do not wear our clothing, we don’t wanna be associated with that.’[2] So a lot of the brands you see in these photos — Fubu, Karl Kani etc. — they were all independent black-owned brands that came from the community. Tupac did that for free, he didn’t take money from black designers to wear their clothes.”
Unlike most hip-hop projects, Contact High made an effort to be inclusive. Women, who even though have contributed immensely to hip-hop, often get sidelined, on both sides of the microphone get to shine.
“People ask how do I select which photos of women to include in the book,” says Tobak, “There’s not one right way to be a woman. Growing up in the music business, there were very strong women behind the scenes, too — there were women running labels, there were women writers and photographers, so I didn’t have to try that hard to get an equal pairing between men and women photographers, we’ve always been there.”
Knowing all the dynamics in place, Tobak says she ensured a diverse selection of images to send the message that there’s space in hip-hop for different kinds of women rappers. “We have Nicki Minaj and Queen Latifah in the book,” she says. “For me, as long as the woman is in control of the image that’s being put out, apart from what somebody else wants her to look like, then that’s going to be my criteria.”
Contact High gives fans a glimpse into how iconic album and magazine covers were made. It affords rappers their complexity, which they are usually denied by the media and they themselves deny the world.
Follow Contact High on Instagram and their website.

