piano chord forcefully kickstarts the song, followed by quick scales, low to high, high to low. Gloria Gaynor’s voice starts timidly: “First I was afraid/I was petrified.” As she grows certain in her story of survival and strength, her voice starts to boom, claiming space. The guitar riff starts as Gaynor is forced to confront her terrible ex — “And so you’re back/From outer space” — as if it’s giving her momentum to send him away and live a better life without him.
In late 1978, Gloria Gaynor released “I Will Survive” as a B-side disco track, not knowing the song would soon become the definitive single of her career. The track was a hit in the disco scene and quickly became an anthem of survival in the LGBTQ community that would endure until at least the mid-1990s.
The song, a B-side to a song called “Substitute,” was written and produced by Freddie Perren and Dino Fekaris, who wrote “I Will Survive” as an inspiration to overcome their own obstacles. By his account, Fekaris wrote the lyrics after he was fired from Motown Records as an inspiration for himself and his ability to survive and become a full-time songwriter.
Gaynor was facing her own challenges at the time: After being dropped by record label Polydor, she fell off the stage during a performance and was left paralyzed from the waist down. She went through spinal surgery and a three-month hospital stay. She was still wearing a back brace when she recorded “I Will Survive” after being picked up again by Polydor.
The moment Gaynor was living in when she recorded “I Will Survive” no doubt contributed to the song’s energetic message of survival.
“[Fekaris and Perren] said, ‘We think you’re the one that we’ve been waiting for to record this song that we wrote a couple of years ago,’” Gaynor explained in a 2013 interview with Audible. “When I read the lyrics, I realized the reason they’d been waiting for me to record that song was that God had given that song to them for them to set aside, waiting for him to get everything in order for me to meet up with them. And that song was ‘I Will Survive.’”
The moment Gaynor was living in when she recorded “I Will Survive” — rejection from the music industry as a talented Black woman, the inability to rely on her body for the first time — no doubt contributed to the song’s energetic message of survival. Soon, this message became important to people in the LGBTQ community, expanding the message of endurance to more people in the margins of society.
Perhaps nowadays this seems strange: Gaynor has always been openly religious, and when asked explicitly about her LGBTQ fan base in a 2007 BBC interview, she said, “I want to lead them to Christ and what he has for them.” But the origins of disco, the genre in which Gaynor thrived, and the public’s racism, queerphobia against the genre, along with the AIDS crisis in the late 1970s and the whole of the 1980s, tell a more complete story as to why “I Will Survive” remains an LGBTQ anthem to this day.
BBefore the mainstreaming of disco music, the genre emerged as an urban counterculture that protested the dominance of rock music and heteronormativity. The first disco gatherings were small private parties organized by New York City DJ David Mancuso in 1970, whose soirees were a safe space for gay men to dance together without being arrested. The genre itself puts less emphasis on guitar riffs at a time when rock and roll was at its height, allowing for a mixture of queer African American, Latinx, and Italian American music that stood as a counterpoint to Woodstock hippie culture. These queer parties and sounds widely rejected the nonnormative, opening up space for queerness and racial mixing through music and dancing.
“Historical accounts locate disco’s origins in Manhattan clubs whose clientele were African American and Latino, and gay — meaning: gay men,” writes musicologist Nadine Hubbs in her article “‘I Will Survive’: Musical Mappings of Queer Social Space in a Disco Anthem.” However, Hubbs clarifies that the scene quickly extended beyond cis gay men of color to include queer women and genderqueer people: “Gay men and lesbians, drag queens and ‘fag hags’ were all part of the 1970s–1980s disco scene in countless queer locales, whether or not at disco’s New York.”
“This song has a powerful message: that each of us holds our destiny in our own hands, and that we control how we will be after something traumatic happens to us.”
Disco music was a place of resistance for those considered too gay, too Black, or too Latino to join the mainstream hippie rock and roll scene. Tim Lawrence, professor of cultural studies at the University of East London, argues that the disco scene attempted to create a “democratic, cross-cultural community that was open-ended in its formation,” where people who frequented the scene were aware of its queer thrust or were queer themselves. According to Lawrence, the dancing of the disco scene did not reaffirm heterosexuality, cis-normativity, or even categories of race; it destabilized those constructions through an open and diverse dance floor with endless possibilities.
Niv, 59, a gay man who first heard “I Will Survive” in a West Hollywood nightclub, explains that the song expresses a kind of control over the queer community’s own destiny. “This song has a powerful message: that each of us holds our destiny in our own hands, and that we control how we will be after something traumatic happens to us,” he says. “The message constantly reminds us that we will make it through. And when we hear it again, for the millionth time we recall how we did make it through the last time or the time before that, and that we have the infinite capacity to do so again and again.”
The possibilities of a queer-accepting society before the AIDS crisis, which would hit the LGBTQ community in 1980, were palpable. In the face of families who didn’t accept queerness, “I Will Survive” felt like a revolution of the self in a growing scene of acceptance. Gaynor recording the song in a back brace, the lyrics inspired by being down and out and still surviving through it all, and the growing imposition of Gaynor’s voice as she bellows that she will survive, no matter what — these were ripe aspects to be read as queer across the United States and the world.
From 1981 onward, the queer club scene during the AIDS crisis would become a facet of survival for the queer community, where people met their friends and made sure they were still alive. “Often, I was relieved to see people at the Saint at large parties,” writes Steve Weinstein on why clubbing was so important for gay men during the crisis. “I had assumed they had died in the interim.”
But even before the crisis, the LGBTQ community was struggling with prejudice, police repression, and fatal hatred. In those safe spaces the disco scene provided, as Gaynor’s singing becomes more dramatic and her transformation is complete, the listener can briefly believe this is true for themselves, even if society’s violence and neglect might take that away tomorrow.
TThe possibilities of liberation through the disco scene were eroded, Lawrence writes, once disco went mainstream in films like Saturday Night Fever in 1978, which whitewashed and straightened the genre to sell it more widely. Disco was being commercialized, displaced from its place of radical counterculture; it soon became an economic threat to rock and roll, and its racial and queer origins only stoked the fire.
After “I Will Survive” gained platinum single status in May 1979, an anti-disco riot broke out in South Chicago in July at the behest of radio personality Steve Dahl. Rock, metal, and new wave fans became angry at how disco was being mainstreamed, taking space in radio broadcasts that, they felt, the genre didn’t deserve.
Dahl, an already controversial radio personality at the time, invited his listeners to bring records they would like to see burned to Comiskey Park after the first White Sox game on July 12, 1979. Dahl’s listeners had become steadily fed up with disco’s domination of air time; his incitement attracted 50,000 people who had no interest in watching the White Sox play the Detroit Tigers. They wanted to see Dahl explode the disco records they hated to the chants of “Disco sucks!” After Dahl gave a speech and blew up a box of records, “Fans charged out from the stands, wrecking the field and causing the cancellation of the second game (the first time a game was canceled due to a factor other than weather),” writes Tony Sclafani for MSN Today. “Eventually, police were called in.”
Despite Dahl later claiming that his anti-disco campaign was for monetary gain as his rock-playing radio station became increasingly irrelevant, his critics claimed there were racist undertones to his rhetoric. Craig Werner, author of A Change Is Gonna Come: Music, Race, and the Soul of America, describes the anti-disco movement as “an unholy alliance of funkateers and feminists, progressives and puritans, rockers and reactionaries. Nonetheless, the attacks on disco gave respectable voice to the ugliest kinds of unacknowledged racism, sexism, and homophobia.”
Though Disco Demolition Night and the subsequent death of disco were about the wider origins of the genre, Gaynor’s “I Will Survive” still stands as an anthem of liberation that inadvertently defied the culture wars of the time.
Similar to current culture wars where diversity and intersectionality are scapegoated as cosmopolitan and outside the working-class imaginary, disco was similarly decontextualized from its working-class, queer, Black, and Brown roots. After Disco Demolition Night, the word “disco” became controversial, with record labels rebranding to “dance music” instead.
“Disco never got credit for being the first and only music ever to transcend all nationalities, race, creed, color, and age groups,” Gaynor told Sclafani when asked about the decline of disco after the riot. “It was common ground for everyone.”
TThough Disco Demolition Night and the subsequent death of disco were about the wider origins of the genre, Gaynor’s “I Will Survive” still stands as an anthem of liberation that inadvertently defied the culture wars of the time. Beyond the queer readings of the anthem and its relevance to the AIDS crisis, Gaynor has admitted in recent years that in addition to the back brace she wore, she had to overcome an even bigger battle as a Black woman. Gaynor is a survivor of multiple instances of child sexual assault, something she revealed in her memoir titled after her defining single.
“I felt that as an entertainer, I should disclose this part of my life to help people who’ve gone through it recognize that it’s not your fault,” Gaynor said in a 2017 interview on Oprah: Where Are They Now?
Gaynor’s experience brings the draw of “I Will Survive” firmly into the reality of Black womanhood and the need to survive in the intersection of being Black and a woman in America. According to the African American Policy Forum, 60% of Black girls will experience sexual violence by the time they turn 18, so Gaynor’s experience is not uncommon. People who suffered gendered violence have called themselves “survivors” rather than “victims” since the 1970s, so it is unsurprising that “I Will Survive” came across as a feminist anthem even before Gaynor’s revelation about her own survivorship.
“Putting together the lyrics with knowing that the singer is a Black woman, it becomes relatable to me,” says Isabela da Silva Pery, 23, who is Afro-Latina. “Especially in relation to relationships, because of the Black woman’s loneliness, but also more generally with regards to racism. It’s a point of surviving despite the prejudice, because you are alive and you feel love. Especially in the current moment we are living.”
“I Will Survive” tells the story of a transformation of the self, a realization that your abuser — be it society in general or a specific person — has lied to you and that you are worthy of survival and love. This transformation is what survivors of gendered and sexual violence go through when they are processing and healing. While writing this essay, several women of different races told me the song gave them strength to leave an abusive partner.
“I remember listening to ‘I Will Survive’ and hearing the line ‘I’m not that chained-up little girl who’s still in love with you,’ and it really resonated with me,” a survivor of domestic abuse who prefers not to identify herself told me. “It was at that point that I felt the wool had been pulled from my eyes, and I stopped seeing [my abuser] as this troubled person whose attention I craved, but a very toxic person who I no longer wanted anything to do with.”
Musicologist Nadine Hubbs describes “I Will Survive” as a song that contains a diverse exchange of musical and verbal discourses of difference that inspires marginalized people across several intersections to feel seen and understood. In a world of pain and hopelessness, there is something liberating about someone asserting they have what it takes to keep going despite a world that hates you because of who you are. The mainstreaming of disco, Hubbs argues, allowed this radical message to “pass” in mainstream culture, but it also provoked a backlash when its disruption of the status quo was found out.
Thriving in this world can be difficult if you live in the margins. Sexuality, race, gender, and social class are categories that define our experiences, the pitfalls we are likely to fall into, and whether or not we survive. “I Will Survive” isn’t just an anthem for survival; it also expresses hope about what comes after survival. As Gaynor has spent most of her career affirming, survival is the first step to freedom, independence, and happiness — and who doesn’t want to believe these are possible?